STAGE 0 – Problem Statement
1. What makes a movie “successful” in this project?
A movie is considered successful when its revenue is strictly greater than its budget.
Exact rule used:
success = 1 if revenue > budget else 0
2. Why is predicting film success valuable?

Film studios / producers: Helps decide whether to green-light a project or adjust budget and marketing strategy before production.
Investors / financiers: Allows better risk assessment and capital allocation toward projects with higher predicted probability of commercial success.

3. Objective and concrete steps
Objective: Build an interactive system that predicts whether a movie will be commercially successful and explains the key drivers.
Steps taken:

Cleaned the data and created the binary success label.
Performed exploratory data analysis and statistical tests.
Trained a Random Forest classifier and evaluated its performance.
Wrapped the entire analysis into a deployable Streamlit dashboard.

4. Classification problem
This is a binary classification problem because the target variable has two discrete classes (success / failure).
The target variable is the column success (1 = revenue > budget, 0 otherwise).

STAGE 1 – Data Preparation
1. Load the dataset

Rows: 2000
Columns: 7
Summary statistics (numeric fields) were printed and examined.

2. Missing values and zeros

No missing values in any column.
Zero budget: 0
Zero revenue: 0
A budget or revenue of 0 is problematic because it usually means the value was not reported. Keeping such rows would create false “failures”. In this dataset none existed after initial filtering.

3. Target column and class balance

Success rate: 80.7%
Class balance: Success = 80.7%, Failure = 19.3%
The dataset is imbalanced toward successful movies.

4. Genres processing
The genres column contained JSON-like strings.
I extracted the list of genre names using ast.literal_eval and created two new columns:

genre_list → full list of genres
primary_genre → first genre (used for filtering and Chi-square test)


STAGE 2 – Exploratory Data Analysis
1. Budget vs Revenue
There is a clear positive relationship: higher budgets tend to earn higher revenue. However, many high-budget films still fall below the break-even line, showing that large budgets do not guarantee success.
2. Genre trends
Most common genres: Romance, Adventure, Science Fiction, Animation, Comedy.
Success rates across top genres are relatively similar (mostly 75–82%). No single genre strongly dominates commercial success.
3. Popularity, runtime, vote_average vs success

Popularity shows the clearest positive association with success.
Vote average shows a milder positive association.
Runtime distributions of successful and unsuccessful movies largely overlap → weakest association.

4. Correlation heatmap

Strongest correlation: Budget ↔ Revenue (0.76)
Success ↔ Revenue (0.37) – expected because success is derived from revenue.
Popularity, runtime and vote_average have very weak linear correlation with success.
Modelling concern: Revenue must never be used as a feature (data leakage).


STAGE 3 – Statistical Testing
1. T-Test (popularity)

Null hypothesis (H₀): Mean popularity is the same for successful and unsuccessful movies.
Result: t = 2.062, p = 0.0397
Conclusion: Reject H₀ (p < 0.05). Successful movies have significantly higher popularity.

2. Chi-Square test (primary genre)

Null hypothesis (H₀): Genre and success are independent.
Result: χ² = 1.8, p = 0.995
Conclusion: Fail to reject H₀. There is no statistically significant association between primary genre and success in this dataset.

3. Meaning of p-value
A p-value is the probability of observing the data (or more extreme results) if the null hypothesis is true.
I used the conventional significance threshold α = 0.05.

STAGE 4 – Predictive Modeling (Random Forest)
1. Features and target

Features used: budget, popularity, runtime, vote_average
Excluded:
title → unique text, not useful for prediction
revenue → would cause data leakage
Full genre list → would require multi-hot encoding (kept simple for this project)


2. Train-test split

Split ratio: 80% train / 20% test (stratified)
A separate test set is important to evaluate how the model performs on unseen data and to avoid overfitting.

3. How a Random Forest works
A Random Forest builds many decision trees on random subsets of rows and features. Each tree votes for a class, and the majority vote becomes the final prediction. This reduces overfitting compared to a single decision tree.
4. Model evaluation

Accuracy: 0.645
Precision: 0.811
Recall: 0.731
Confusion Matrix:text[[ 22  55]
 [ 87 236]]

The model is reasonably good at identifying successful movies but weaker at correctly identifying failures (due to class imbalance).
5. Feature importance
Ranking:

Popularity (0.268)
Budget (0.261)
Vote Average (0.257)
Runtime (0.214)

This agrees with the EDA and the T-test: popularity and budget are the strongest drivers.

STAGE 5 – Streamlit Dashboard & Deployment
1–3.
An interactive Streamlit dashboard was built with:

Sidebar filters for genre and minimum vote average
Multiple EDA charts with written insights
Statistical test results
Model performance metrics and feature importance
Live prediction form where users can input budget, popularity, runtime and vote average

4.
requirements.txt was created and the app runs cleanly with:
streamlit run MovieIQ.py
5. (Bonus)
The app can be deployed on Streamlit Community Cloud.
(If you deploy it, paste the live link here.)

Reflection
If a studio asked “Will our next film succeed?”, I would treat MovieIQ’s answer as a useful directional signal, not a definitive yes/no.
Limitation: The model only uses four numeric features and ignores important real-world drivers such as marketing spend, star power, release timing, and competition.
Improvement with more time: I would add multi-hot encoding for genres, external marketing and cast data, and use a temporal train-test split (train on older films, test on recent ones) to make the model more realistic.